STAT 1600: Discovery with Data Fall 2025 Schedule Class room: 4705 Sangren Hall Class time: T R 11:00 AM - 12:15 PM Instructor : Samuel Jones Armoo Email: samueljones. armoo@wmich. edu Office: Rood 3365 Course Description A general introduction to data analysis with an emphasis on critical thinking. Topics include: data collection, sampling and experimentation, measurement issues, descriptive statistics, statistical graphics, normal distribution, cross - classified data, correlation and association, formal statistical inferences, and resampling methods. This class wil l also involve group projects. Examples and problems will often relate to current global issues - educational, economical, environmental, political, etc. Statistical software will also be used to help students to focus more on the understanding and critica l thinking and inference rather than just the mechanics of the procedures. This course satisfies WMU Essential Studies Level 1: Foundations – Quantitative Literacy Category. Essential Studies Level, Category, and Student Learning Objectives STAT 1600 – Discovery with Data is a 3 - credit Essential Studies Foundations (Level 1) course in the Quantitative Literacy category. The essential studies student learning outcomes for this course are to • Analyze and interpret quantitative data. • Develop creative and critical thinking. Student Learning Outcomes STAT 1600 introduces students to the academic study of statistics while accomplishing the goals of essential studies. The student learning outcomes below address the essential studies outcomes required for the course. The first outcome (Analyze and interpr et quantitative data) will be assessed through a multiple - choice quiz on E - learning that will be given both at the beginning and end of the course. The second outcome (Develop creative and critical thinking) will be assessed by open - ended written workshops at the beginning and end of the course. Responses to these questions will be evaluated using rubrics developed by the WMU Essential Studies program. A student who successfully completes STAT 1600 will 1. Analyze and interpret quantitative data. • Collect and interpret data. • Perform quantitative data analysis. • Understand different types of models. 2. Develop creative and critical thinking • Think creatively about datasets and what might be found with them. • Think critically about the limitations of a given dataset. • Develop critical habits of mind when confronted with conflicts between their own opinions and knowledge gleaned from data. Course Objectives Successful students will: 1. Be able to analyze and interpret quantitative data. 2. Significantly grow in their mathematical and statistical literacy. 3. Be able to identify many different types of data and select appropriate models for an analysis of each type. 4. Be ready to take more social responsibility through acquisition of and critical thinking about data. Course Structure This class meets twice a week. Each class meeting will contain a lecture and time to work on a workshop to be handed in before leaving class. Our e - learning page contains handouts that correspond to the slides that will be discussed in class. You are highl y encouraged to print out these handouts and bring them to class. Grades are kept up to date on e - learning. While in class, you are expected to pay attention and not be a distraction to other students. If you choose to take notes on an electronic device, this is fine, however please be respectful to other students and their learning. Required Materials • A scientific calculator or equivalent computer software • iClicker: An iClicker remote is required for this course. Points earned during iClicker sessions will be based on both participation and correct responses. Coursepack Instead of a textbook, this course utilizes a coursepack. This is free for students and can be found on our e - learning page.

You are highl y encouraged to print out these handouts and bring them to class. Grades are kept up to date on e - learning. While in class, you are expected to pay attention and not be a distraction to other students. If you choose to take notes on an electronic device, this is fine, however please be respectful to other students and their learning. Required Materials • A scientific calculator or equivalent computer software • iClicker: An iClicker remote is required for this course. Points earned during iClicker sessions will be based on both participation and correct responses. Coursepack Instead of a textbook, this course utilizes a coursepack. This is free for students and can be found on our e - learning page. Workshop s There will be 2 1 workshop s throughout the semester due in class. You will be given time after the lecture to complete it. These workshops are located in your coursepack so you’re encouraged to print them before class. If you know you will not be in class and do not want to miss the workshop, you may submit it via email to your instructor. It will not be counted late if it is received by class time. Contact your instructor for which version of the workshop they’d like yo u to complete. You’re limited to turning in workshops electronically in advance to 2 workshops. You are expected to attend class regularly. At the end of the semester, your lowest workshop grade will be dropped. Review Assignments There are 5 review assignments throughout the semester. These are all online assignments and you are allowed two attempts. Note that you do not need to take both attempts. If you are happy with the grade from your first attempt, you may complete it once. If you choose to take two attempts, your grade will be the higher of the two grades. Essential Studies Assessment s Aside from the 21 workshops, there will be 2 pre - quizzes and a pre - workshop assigned near the start of the semester, as well as 2 post - quizzes and a post - workshop assigned near the end of the semester. These quizzes and workshops will be extra - credit. P oints will be earned based on correct answers and completion. Exams and Make Up Policy There will be three exams during the term. You will be allowed two hours to complete each exam. All exams are online and can be taken at any point over the two days, not just during your class period. On the day of your class meeting, there will not be class. Your instructor will be available in their office to answer questions during this time. Make up exams are offered according to the dates below. Th ese date s are non - negotiable. Your grade for the exam will be either your earned grade on the exam or 50% of the average of all students that took the exam, whichever is LOWER. Note that you will only be allowed to make up one exam. You will need to email your instructor by the date in the table below. Exam Date of Exam Date to Email Instructor By Make Up Exam Date Exam 1 9/29 – 9/30 10/2 10/6 Exam 2 11/17 – 11/18 11/20 11/24 Exam 3 12/9 – 12/10 12/11 12/12 Late Work We will be using a “token” system for late work. You will have a total of 5 “tokens” this semester. This policy is in place for missed assignments for any reason. Additional late assignments/”tokens” will not be given. You can use “tokens” on workshops and review assignments. To use “tokens”: • Workshops: If you are not able to submit a workshop on time, you may spend “tokens” to complete it late without penalty. If you submit the workshop to your instructor within 24 hours of class, this will cost one “token”. If you submit the workshop to your instructor within 48 hours of class, this will cost two “tokens”. After 48 hours, workshops will no longer be accepted. • Review assignments: If you are not able to complete a review assignment on time, you may spend “tokens” to complete it late without penalty. Because the review assignments are on e - learning, you will need to ask your instructor to grant you access to it.

Additional late assignments/”tokens” will not be given. You can use “tokens” on workshops and review assignments. To use “tokens”: • Workshops: If you are not able to submit a workshop on time, you may spend “tokens” to complete it late without penalty. If you submit the workshop to your instructor within 24 hours of class, this will cost one “token”. If you submit the workshop to your instructor within 48 hours of class, this will cost two “tokens”. After 48 hours, workshops will no longer be accepted. • Review assignments: If you are not able to complete a review assignment on time, you may spend “tokens” to complete it late without penalty. Because the review assignments are on e - learning, you will need to ask your instructor to grant you access to it. If you request to co mplete the review assignment late within 24 hours of the due date, this will cost one “token”. If you request to complete the review assignment late within 48 hours of the due date, this will cost two “tokens”. After 48 hours, you may no longer request to complete a review assignment late. If you request to complete the assignment late, you will have until 72 hours after the due date to complete it. After your tokens are gone, you will no longer be able to submit assignments late. We encourage you to use your “tokens” wisely and stay on top of due dates. Note that there is an item in the gradebook called “ Late Work Tokens”. At the start of the semester, everyone will have a 5 in the gradebook for this. Once you use tokens, this number will be reduced accordingly. These grade items do not affect your overall grade; they are weighted as 0% of your final grade. Grading Policy I reserve the right to curve the scale dependent on overall class scores at the end of the semester. Any curve will only ever make it easier to obtain a certain letter grade. The grade will count the assessments using the following weights: Workshops 3 0 % Review Assignments 2 0% iClicker 10 % Exams 4 0% Minimum percentage needed for each letter grade A BA B CB C DC D E 90% 85% 80% 75% 70% 65% 60% 0% Tutorin g Tutoring will be offered both in person and virtually this semester. Both services are free to students. The purpose of the tutor lab is to give you additional support and explanation in supplement to what is being taught in your Statistic course(s). The tutors are available because of the course fees that you pay for your Statistics courses. Thus, you shou ld take advantage of the additional help outside of your class. In person tutoring : The tutor lab is located in 2261 ROOD HALL and operates at the following times: Monday through Thursday 9 :00 am – 5 :00 pm Friday 1 0 :00 am – 2:00 pm The tutor lab will open on Tuesday, September 2 nd. Virtual tutoring : Virtually tutoring is offered Monday through Thursday from 5:00 – 9:00 pm beginning September 2 nd. Tutoring is provided virtually through the Microsoft Teams Academic Support Hub. In order to receive tutoring support in your course, please follow these steps: 1. Go to Microsoft Teams 2. Select (or add if it doesn’t appear on the student’s page) the ‘WMU Academic Support Hub’ team 3. Select ‘Ask For Help Now’ 4. Announce on the chat that you are there to tutor Once you are in the Academic Support Hub, please post the name of the class that you need help with in the chat (similar to posting on a Facebook wall). Once a post is made, a course assistant will begin a video chat to assist you. The scheduling for tut oring availability can be found on the Support Hub as well. Note that if the university is closed or it is a break/holiday, the tutor lab, both in person and virtual, will also be closed. Important Note: This syllabus, along with course assignments and due dates, are subject to change. It is the student’s responsibility to check E - learning for corrections or updates to the syllabus. Any changes will be clearly noted in course announcements or through email.

Select ‘Ask For Help Now’ 4. Announce on the chat that you are there to tutor Once you are in the Academic Support Hub, please post the name of the class that you need help with in the chat (similar to posting on a Facebook wall). Once a post is made, a course assistant will begin a video chat to assist you. The scheduling for tut oring availability can be found on the Support Hub as well. Note that if the university is closed or it is a break/holiday, the tutor lab, both in person and virtual, will also be closed. Important Note: This syllabus, along with course assignments and due dates, are subject to change. It is the student’s responsibility to check E - learning for corrections or updates to the syllabus. Any changes will be clearly noted in course announcements or through email. S chedule Technical Assistance Week 1 8/27 – 8/31 Welcome Lecture 1: Introduction Week 2 9/1 – 9/7 No classes 9/1 for Labor Day Lecture 1: Introduction Lecture 2: Plots Workshop 1: Due in class Workshop 2: Due in class Pre - Quizzes: Due 9/ 5 Pre - Workshop: Due 9/ 5 Week 3 9/8 – 9/14 L ecture 3: Measures of Center and Spread Lecture 4: Effects of Adding or Multiplying by a Constant; Threats to Valid Comparisons Workshop 3 : Due in class Workshop 4 : Due in class Tutor Lab Visit Card: Due 9/11 Review Assignment 1: Due 9/12 Week 4 9/15 – 9/21 Lecture 5: Studies Lecture 6: Probabilities and Distributions Workshop 5 : Due in class Workshop 6 : Due in class Week 5 9/22 – 9/28 Lecture 7: Normal Distribution Review Workshop 7 : Due in class Review Assignment 2: Due 9/25 Week 6 9/29 – 10/5 Exam 1: 9/29 – 9/30 No class on 9/29 or 9/30 : instructor will be available in office during class period Lecture 8: Sampling Distribution of a Sample Proportion Workshop 8 : Due in class Week 7 10/6 – 10/12 Lecture 9: Sampling Distribution of a Sample Mean Lecture 10: Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion Workshop 9 : Due in class Workshop 10 : Due in class Week 8 10/13 – 10/19 Lecture 11: Confidence Interval for a Population Mean No classes 10/15 – 10/17 for Fall Break Workshop 1 1 : Due in class Week 9 10/ 20 – 10/26 Lecture 12: Confidence Interval for the Difference Between Means from Two Independent Populations Lecture 13: Confidence Interval for the Mean Difference from Dependent Populations Workshop 1 2 : Due in class Workshop 13: Due in class Review Assignment 3: Due 10/24 Week 10 10/27 – 11/2 L ecture 14: Introduction to Hypothesis Testing Lecture 15: Hypothesis Testing for a Population Proportion Workshop 14: Due in class Workshop 15: Due in class Week 1 1 11/3 – 11/9 Lecture 16: Hypothesis Testing for a Population Mean Lecture 17: Hypothesis Testing for the Difference Between Two Means from Independent Populations Workshop 16: Due in class Workshop 17: Due in class Week 1 2 11/10 – 11/16 Lecture 18: Hypothesis Testing for the Mean Difference from Dependent Populations; Errors Review Workshop 18: Due in class Review Assignment 4: Due 11/14 Week 1 3 11/17 – 11/23 Exam 2: 11/17 – 11/18 No class on 11/17 or 11/18 : instructor will be available in office during class period Lecture 19: Chi - Square Test of Independence Workshop 19 : Due in class Week 1 4 11/24 – 11/30 Lecture 20: Correlation and Simple Linear Regression No class after noon on 11/26 through 11/28 for Thanksgiving Break Workshop 20 : Due in class Week 1 5 12/1 – 12/7 Lecture 21: Simple Linear Regression Review Workshop 2 1 : Due in class Post - Quizzes: Due 12/4 Post - Workshop: Due 12/4 Review Assignment 5: Due 12/5 Week 1 6 12/8 – 12/12 Final Exam : 12/9 – 12/10 No class meeting s during finals week If you need technical assistance at any time during the course or need to report a problem with Elearning please contact the WMU Help Desk. Academic Honesty Students are required to comply with the university policy on academic integrity found in the Student Code of Conduct. Don’t cheat or be complicit in another’s cheating.

Academic Honesty Students are required to comply with the university policy on academic integrity found in the Student Code of Conduct. Don’t cheat or be complicit in another’s cheating. Do not take another student’s test for them or hire anyone to take your exams. Take yo ur own exams. You are responsible for making yourself aware of and understanding all the policies and procedures that pertain to Academic Honesty. These policies include cheating, fabrication, falsification and forgery, multiple submission, plagiarism, com plicity and computer misuse. (The policies can be found at http://catalog. wmich. edu under Academic Policies, Student Rights and Responsibilities. ) If there is reason to believe you have been involved in academic dishonesty, you will be referred to the Office of Student Conduct. You will be given the opportunity to review the charge(s). I f you believe you are not responsible, you will have the opportunity for a hearing. You should consult with your instructor if you are uncertain about an issue of academic honesty prior to the submission of an assignment or test. In addition, you are encou raged to visit the following websites http://osc. wmich. edu and www. wmich/edu/registrar to access the Code of Honor and general academic policies on such issues as diversity and religious observance. Accommodations for Disabilities Both in compliance with and in the spirit of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), we would like to work with you if you have a disability that will impact the work in this course. If you have a documented disability and wish to discuss reasonable aca demic accommodations, please contact your instructor in a timely fashion. Accommodations are not retroactive; they begin after notification. You may also contact the Office of Disability Services for Students at 269 - 387 - 2116. Incompletes Department policy will be followed on incompletes.